The internal of things and mHealth,
mHealth stands for mobile health.
It's how these mobile devices are helping
you achieve your fitness goals,
lead a healthier lifestyle, and
also help you cure your diseases.
Okay, so there we are,
for me, on I'm overweight,
or I'm sick, I can't get out of my car,
stop watching TV, and can someone help me?
So what?
There are all these devices.
You know, there's release of these watch,
the Apple watch, the Android watch,
you wear them, it kind of keeps
track of how active you are.
And if you've been sitting
around too long, I know at least
the Apple voice says get around,
move around, you've been sitting too long.
Get up for the first few times,
you obey the law.
But after that, you become immune to it.
And then there is these bracelets,
Fitbits, you wear.
Kind of keeps track of how many
steps you took during the day.
Encourages you to be more active and when
you are near the phone, it syncs your data
with the phone, gives historical
statistics, how active you've been.
And of course there are these heart rate
monitors people wear when you work out,
and again, it sends data to your phone.
So when you're working out it can red
line, so make sure you are hitting
the peak, you can do interval training,
things like that.
So all of these devices,
slew of devices come into the market, and
all these work with your
phone in some fashion.
You can quantify yourself how
effective you are in working out.
And here's the iOS health screen,
it can keep track of the activity for
the day, the nutrition.
For example,
you have apps like MyFitnessPal.
You can go log all the stuff you ate for
the day.
You can list the calories, so
you can target set number of calories for
the week and
how many pounds you want to lose.
Blood sugar, sleep, and all of these
devices, since you sleep with them they
can see how much you figit and
how good of sleep you get.
In fact, you can buy devices which kind of
measures how much REM sleep you had and
your respiratory rate, oxygen saturation,
of course, most importantly weight.
There is weighing scales right now,
you stand on it.
It's supposed to measure your fat
content by sending some pulses.
I don't know how accurate they are but
all these devices
have entered the market now to
help you with your health health.
And these guys work
with your mobile phone.
And all this data is collected and
sent to some server somewhere,
with huge amounts of data.
So what do they do with that data?
Let me come to that next.
It's the field of big data analytics.
So it's so difficult to lose weight right?
So many people try to come up with
techniques people can follow to
lose weight but
it's becoming a really difficult problem.
So see if they can find patterns for
those people who lose weight
what do they achieve?
For example like Netflix,
runs all these serials.
They try to figure out when do people get
hooked after a certain number of episodes.
So for example, there's this
popular series called Breaking Bad.
It seems people get hooked after
the third episode, or second episode,
something like that.
And so they're looking at
the patterns of people watching.
They can figure out when they
get hooked and they try and
come up with a formula to hook you in.
After that, once you get hooked,
they can feed you any junk you want and
you'll keep watching it
because you're hooked.
So, same with weight loss.
They're trying to come
up with this magic pill.
Hey, if it works then you kind of hit
your stride, start losing weight.
Data analytics.
So I want to give you some examples.
One interesting one is the Target
shopping store in the US
stumbled upon this pregnancy
prediction algorithm which they knew
somebody was pregnant even
before the person knew.
How it worked out was Target was
running some analytics on data they
had collected off people's buying habits.
And they knew some of the women who
were pregnant because they had a baby
registry set up.
Once the baby arrives,
these are the things they want.
And they start analyzing all
the products they bought over time.
And they noticed some pattern in them.
They all bought unscented lotion,
big cotton balls, and
certain type of paper napkins.
Guess what,
they started targeting them with coupons,
they started mailing coupons to them.
Now hey, dollar off this,
$5 off nappies, and all that.
And apparently one day this angry dad
came to the store, shown this thing.
What the hell are you guys doing sending
my teen daughter these coupons for
nappies?
She's not pregnant.
And she was apparently a teen,
and the store apologized.
Said, okay, sorry.
We won't do that.
And later the dad called back and said,
you know what, apparently things were
going on in the house I didn't know about.
My teen is indeed pregnant.
So, your buying habits and
using big data can infer certain
things even you're not aware of.
By the way, there's a link to this
when you watch the MOOC you can access
the document if you wanna read about that.
You can click on the video unfortunately.
Second interesting example is,
you know you wear these FitBits when you
sleep, it can keep track of your motion.
The jawbone guys who make the up wearable,
they did this study,
there was an earthquake in Berkeley,
a couple years ago, or a year ago.
And when it happened of course you're
going to wake up if you're
close to the epicenter.
Oh, and you're farther away from the
epicenter you're less likely to feel it
and probably you slept better.
So this study was about how
much people got disturbed based on
their distance from the epicenter.
So I want to show you the slide next.
Let me come back to this.
So here's the graph.
The earthquake happened at 3 AM.
And so you see people waking up.
And the blue is by Napa,
Sonoma, Berkeley, closest to
the epicenter of the earthquake.
And those guys woke up, and
it took them longer to fall asleep.
And the second curve, you see
the green one, San Francisco, Oakland,
those guys woke up too.
They were further away
from the epi-center.
They were not that disturbed.
And so further and further down, you see
guys, as they recede from the epicenter,
they were less disturbed and slept better.
And they came up with stats that
millions of hours of sleep was lost
because of this earthquake, blah,
blah, but the here point is,
all these variables are generating data
which can be inferred in unique ways.
So this internal of things
is going to come up with
new areas using data analytics to infer
things which you didn't know about, and
hopefully one of them is
to detect patterns and
help you achieve the healthy
lifestyle we all want.
The final one I want to say.
This always freaks people out.
If you have an iPhone,
pull it out and go to settings,
privacy, location services,
system services and frequent locations.
What it does is your phone keeps track
of the frequent places you visit, and if
you go here, if you have it turned on, it
shows you all the places you've been to.
And they go, oh shit, I didn't know people
made it turn it off in front of me.
So you guys should turn it off too
if you don't want to be tracked.
So, think of it, that your phone knows
the frequent places that you go to.
A mall, or whatever it is.
And they can get started hitting
you with shopping offers.
It's all about trying to sell you
something, knowing where you are.
That's all they track.
Okay, finally I eluded to this in
my previous lesson, the HAPIfork.
Losing weight, right,
it's such a big challenge.
And here's my theory.
One is, humans are incredibly
efficient in absorbing calories.
We absorb 100 percent of
the calories we consume and
it is I should say when you work out
you burn ridiculously little amount.
If you eat a toast it's
say 200 calories and
you ride your bike for half hour and
say all you burn is 200 calories.
So the amount of food we need to
kind of do the things we do everyday
averages so little.
So the theory is when you eat you
typically if you are like me, I pig out.
I eat, just don't focus on anything else.
Just chow it down.
There's a delay in the time your
brain tells you are full to
actually when you are full.
So there is the brain kicks in later,
like five minutes later.
By that time you have stuffed yourself.
So the goal is to kind of slow down
the speed at which you eat and
also take bites between every dip it
should be sufficiently spaced out.
So there's this idea for this HAPIfork
it has built in sensors to detect how
fast you eat and
you can also plug into your phone and
it gives you statistics on how you ate.
I think it's got a cool
thing like fork servings.
You took 59 fork servings for
this meal means you took 59 bites.
And the time it took, and
the goal is to spread it out.
Each is slower, so by the time you're full
your brain tells you, you're full, and
you can avoid excess calories.
So I'm gonna leave you with this
video of their fundraising campaign.
By the way,
I'm not endorsing any products.
I'm just showing you all this.
We are not endorsing any product.
We're just showing you this so,
to give you ideas of new products coming
on the market in some unique ways.
I'll see you in the following lesson.
[MUSIC]